docs: add platforms reference and how-to (#2080)
canonical/charmcraft: docs/reference/platforms.rst

Platforms
=========

Platforms
---------

The ``platforms`` keyword in a ``charmcraft.yaml`` determines where charms are
built and where they run.

For more information on how to build charms for specific bases and
architectures, see the :doc:`Platforms how-to </howto/build-guides/platforms>`
page.

Standard notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <platform-name>:

>        build-on: [<arch>, <arch>]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       build-on: [<arch1>, <arch2>]
```

Author: I like this suggestion but I realize both ways read like it needs to be exactly 2 items.

What I'm trying to convey in this reference is that `build-on` has no size constraints but `build-for` is a single element.  What do you think of?
```yaml
   platforms:
     <platform-name>:
       build-on: [<arch>, ...]
       build-for: [<arch>]
     ...
```

This also shows there can be more than 1 platform.

We could also do a style like `<arch1>, <arch2>, ..., <archX>`.

Reviewer: How about a compromise of `<arch1>, ...`?

Reviewer 2: +1 to @lengau's suggestion. You could also use letters (or nonsense words) instead of numbers to less strongly imply there's a sequence.

Reviewer: I've adjusted this here to say "my-arch", "your-arch" and "our-arch", as well as the ellipsis. I chose the language because as far as I know it's fairly universal that those aren't ordered, but I'm leaving this open for @medubelko 's comments if that's not appropriate.

Reviewer 2: Let's give it a try!

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <base>:<arch>:

Multi-base charms can also use shorthand notation when the platform builds on
and builds for the same architecture. The platform name must be a
:ref:`valid base <reference-bases>` and
:ref:`debian architecture <reference-architectures>` formatted as
``<base>:<arch>``.

.. _reference-build-on:

``build-on``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``build-on`` is a list of architectures and optional bases that describes the
environments where the platform can build. Each entry is formatted as
``[<base>:]<arch>``.

.. _reference-build-for:

``build-for``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``build-for`` is a single-element list containing an architecture and optional
base that describes the environment where the resulting charm can run. The
entry is formatted as ``[<base>:]<arch>``.

``build-for: [all]`` is a special keyword to denote an architecture-independent
charm.

.. _reference-architectures:

Architectures
-------------

Charmcraft uses `Debian's naming convention`_ for architectures.

The following architectures are supported:

* amd64
* arm64
* armhf
* i386
* ppc64el
* riscv64
* s390x

.. _reference-bases:

Bases

> -----

Reviewer: Can you add some form of admonishment (@medubelko will be able to say what's best) that this is not the same as the deprecated `bases` key?

Author: Added.

The ``base`` and ``build-base`` keywords determine the environments where the
charm is built and where it is run.

``base`` and ``build-base`` can't be defined for multi-base charms. Instead,
the base is defined in the ``platforms`` keyword.

``base``
~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

    base: <base>

``base`` determines the runtime environment for the charm. It's formatted as
``<distribution>@<series>`` where ``distribution`` is the name of a Linux
distribution and ``series`` is the release series name.

> Supported bases are:

Reviewer: This isn't actually true. Only Ubuntu 22.04+ are supported currently with the `base` keyword.

Also, while short term having this list here is fine, I think long-term I'd prefer to have a subcommand that tells us the supported bases.

Author: Agreed, and this is going to be outdated when 24.10 goes EOL in July 2025.  FWIW, dropping 24.10 will require manual intervention in craft-providers and charmcraft anyways.

Multi-base notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <platform-name>:
       build-on: [<base>:<arch>, <base>:<arch>]
       build-for: [<base>:<arch>]

Multi-base charms define a :ref:`base <reference-bases>` in each platform entry
instead of the top-level ``base`` and ``build-base`` keywords. Within each
platform entry, the base must be the same for all ``build-on`` and
``build-for`` entries.

The recommended platform name is ``<distribution>-<series>-<build-for-arch>``
(for example, ``ubuntu-24.04-riscv64``).

.. _reference-platforms-multi-base-shorthand:

Multi-base shorthand notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <base>:<arch>:

Multi-base charms can also use shorthand notation when the platform builds on
and builds for the same architecture. The platform name must be a
:ref:`valid base <reference-bases>` and
:ref:`debian architecture <reference-architectures>` formatted as
``<base>:<arch>``.

.. _reference-build-on:

``build-on``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``build-on`` is a list of architectures and optional bases that describes the
environments where the platform can build. Each entry is formatted as

> ``[<base>:]<arch>``.

Reviewer 2: This notation twists me in light of `build-for: [<base>:<arch>]` and `<base>:<arch>:`. I don't see any examples where we use it. Are the square brackets literal?

Reviewer: Yeah, this is hard to define as-is. I've added an English description of the format and some examples to help disambiguate.

Reviewer: I've also converted the examples here to use YAML's multi-line sequence syntax so we shouldn't have any load-bearing brackets

Reviewer 2: Ah, so they're not literal. That's a tricky one to format, since YAML uses square brackets for inline collections. Gah. I've suggested a workaround in my upcoming review.

.. _reference-build-for:

``build-for``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``build-for`` is a single-element list containing an architecture and optional
base that describes the environment where the resulting charm can run. The
entry is formatted as ``[<base>:]<arch>``.

``build-for: [all]`` is a special keyword to denote an architecture-independent
charm.

.. _reference-architectures:

Architectures
-------------

Charmcraft uses `Debian's naming convention`_ for architectures.

The following architectures are supported:

* amd64
* arm64
* armhf
* i386
* ppc64el
* riscv64

> * s390x

Reviewer 2: It might be worth mapping these to human-friendly names in a table. I compiled the list in the [Snapcraft system reqs](https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/blob/685a8d61a6f378179334a12ab868ddc414e7bd41/docs/reference/system-requirements.rst?plain=1#L14).

Reviewer: Turned it into a table, removed i386 (which Charmcraft doesn't support), and added a note about Juju support. Sadly there doesn't seem to be a Juju architecture support doc I can reference.

.. _reference-bases:

Bases
-----

> .. note::

Reviewer 2: I think this should be `important`. :)

       build-for: [amd64]
     riscv64-cross:
       build-on: [amd64, riscv64]
       build-for: [riscv64]

This snippet generates a build plan with 4 items:

+--------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------+
| number | platform name | build-on arch | build-time base | build-for arch | runtime base |
+========+===============+===============+=================+================+==============+
| 1      | amd64         | amd64         | Ubuntu 24.04    | amd64          | Ubuntu 24.04 |
+--------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------+
| 2      | amd64-debug   | amd64         | Ubuntu 24.04    | amd64          | Ubuntu 24.04 |
+--------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------+
| 3      | riscv64-cross | amd64         | Ubuntu 24.04    | riscv64        | Ubuntu 24.04 |
+--------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------+
| 4      | riscv64-cross | riscv64       | Ubuntu 24.04    | riscv64        | Ubuntu 24.04 |
+--------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+----------------+--------------+

> If Charmcraft executes on an ``riscv64`` system, it filters the build plan to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Charmcraft executes on a ``riscv64`` system, it filters the build plan to
```

only builds with a ``build-on`` of ``riscv64``. This means Charmcraft will only

> build charm #4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
build the fourth charm.
```

> If Charmcraft executes on an ``amd64`` system, it will build charms #1, #2, and
> #3. This can be further filtered with the ``--platform`` argument or the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Charmcraft executes on an ``amd64`` system, it will build charms one, two, and
three. This can be further filtered with the ``--platform`` argument or the
```

        - <some-base>:<another-arch>
        - <another-base>:<some-arch>
        - <another-base>:<another-arch>
       build-for:
        - <base>:<arch>

Multi-base charms define a :ref:`base <reference-bases>` in each platform entry
instead of the top-level ``base`` and ``build-base`` keywords. Within each
platform entry, the base must be the same for all ``build-on`` and
``build-for`` entries.

The recommended platform name is ``<distribution>-<series>-<build-for-arch>``
(for example, ``ubuntu-24.04-riscv64``).

.. _reference-platforms-multi-base-shorthand:

Multi-base shorthand notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <base>:<arch>:

Multi-base charms can also use shorthand notation when the platform builds on
and builds for the same architecture. This shorthand notation is a YAML dictionary
that contains the shorthand name as a key and a null value. The platform name must be a
:ref:`valid base <reference-bases>` and
:ref:`debian architecture <reference-architectures>` formatted as
``<base>:<arch>``.

.. _reference-build-on:

``build-on``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``build-on`` is a list of architectures and optional bases that describes the

> environments where the platform can build. Each entry is formatted with an optional
> base and a mandatory architecture: ``[<base>:]<arch>``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
environments where the platform can build. Entries can be formatted either as only
the architecture (``<arch>``), or as base and architecture (``<base>:<arch>``).
```

page.

Standard notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <platform-name>:
       build-on:
        - <my-arch>
        - <your-arch>
        ...
       build-for:
        - <our-arch>

The platform name is an arbitrary string that describes the platform. The
recommended platform name is the ``build-for`` arch.

See :ref:`build-on <reference-build-on>` and
:ref:`build-for <reference-build-for>` for information on the ``build-on``
and ``build-for`` keywords.

.. _reference-platforms-shorthand:

Shorthand notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <arch>:

Shorthand notation is a simple way to describe charms that build on and build
for the same architecture. Shorthand notation requires the platform name to be
a :ref:`valid debian architecture <reference-architectures>`.

.. _reference-platforms-multi-base:

Multi-base notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <platform-name>:
       build-on:
        - <some-base>:<some-arch>
        - <some-base>:<another-arch>
        - <another-base>:<some-arch>
        - <another-base>:<another-arch>
       build-for:

>         - <base>:<arch>

Author: I think using `some-base`, `another-base`, and `base` may be misleading because craft-platforms will fail to parse a platform entry with multiple bases as described a few lines below with:

> Within each platform entry, the base must be the same for all ``build-on`` and ``build-for`` entries.

There will probably be an exception to this rule once we get closer to 26.04 and need to support `devel` bases.

(for example, ``ubuntu-24.04-riscv64``).

.. _reference-platforms-multi-base-shorthand:

Multi-base shorthand notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

   platforms:
     <base>:<arch>:

Multi-base charms can also use shorthand notation when the platform builds on
and builds for the same architecture. This shorthand notation is a YAML dictionary
that contains the shorthand name as a key and a null value. The platform name must be a
:ref:`valid base <reference-bases>` and
:ref:`debian architecture <reference-architectures>` formatted as
``<base>:<arch>``.

.. _reference-build-on:

``build-on``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``build-on`` is a list of architectures and optional bases that describes the
environments where the platform can build. Entries can be formatted either as only
the architecture (``<arch>``), or as base and architecture (``<base>:<arch>``).

Example ``build-on`` values with only architectures include:

.. code:: yaml

    build-on:
      - amd64
      - riscv64

Example ``build-on`` values containing both a base and an architecture include:

.. code:: yaml

    build-on:
      - ubuntu@24.04:riscv64

>       - ubuntu@22.04:amd64

Author: Similarly, this entire snippet would fail but we could split this into 2 discrete snippets:

```
.. code:: yaml
    build-on:
      - ubuntu@24.04:riscv64
```
```
.. code:: yaml
    build-on:
      - ubuntu@22.04:amd64

same structure as ``build-on``.

``build-for: [all]`` is a special keyword to denote an architecture-independent
charm.

.. _reference-architectures:

Architectures
-------------

Charmcraft uses `Debian's naming convention`_ for architectures and supports several
architectures:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Debian name
      - Description
    * - ``amd64``
      - `64-bit x86 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64>`_
    * - ``arm64``
      - `64-bit ARMv8 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AArch64>`_
    * - ``armhf``
      - `32-bit ARMv7 with hardware floating point
        <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ARM_architecture_family#VFP>`_
    * - ``ppc64el``
      - `Little-endian 64-bit PowerPC <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ppc64>`_
    * - ``s390x``
      - `IBM Z-series Linux <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_on_IBM_Z>`_

.. important::

    While Charmcraft will build on or for each of these architectures, not all
    architectures are supported by all Juju versions, and not all clouds support
    all architectures.

.. _reference-bases:

Bases
-----

.. important::

   The bases described in this section are a different concept than the

>    deprecated ``bases`` keyword in a ``charmcraft.yaml``.

Author: > Can we run a find-replace for "keyword" → "key" in this doc?

That comment was for the how-to, should we do it in the reference as well?
